Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States with an estimated 6 million adults living with heart failure. In patients with heart failure, the physical examination can provide important prognostic information and is also used to guide both diagnosis and management, including determining the need for inpatient versus outpatient management. Presenting symptoms include dyspnea, peripheral edema, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and bendopnea. In patients with suspected heart failure, a head-to-toe physical examination approach is recommended with the addition of special maneuvers such as the measurement of jugular venous pressure, valsalva maneuver, and hepatojugular reflux as needed.

Pericarditis is a common but frequently subclinical entity. There are a number of causes, including infection, systemic illness, cardiac disease, trauma, and neoplasm. Iatrogenic causes include surgery, cardiac instrumentation, irradiation, and medications. The clinical presentation varies, depending on the cause. Chest pain and dyspnea are characteristic complaints. A typical progression of ECG changes occurs during the course of acute pericarditis. These changes occasionally require differentiation from those of acute myocardial infarction or normal variant ST segment elevation. Echocardiography is the most sensitive technique for detecting the presence of pericardial effusion. In addition, a number of echocardiographic findings are characteristic of larger effusions and cardiac tamponade. Any form of pericarditis may lead to the development of cardiac tamponade. Malignant effusion is probably the most common single cause.

Systemic arterial hypertension is the most important modifiable risk factor for all-cause morbidity and mortality worldwide and is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Fewer than half of those with hypertension are aware of their condition, and many others are aware but not treated or inadequately treated, although successful treatment of hypertension reduces the global burden of disease and mortality. The aetiology of hypertension involves the complex interplay of environmental and pathophysiological factors that affect multiple systems, as well as genetic predisposition. The evaluation of patients with hypertension includes accurate standardized blood pressure (BP) measurement, assessment of the patients' predicted risk of atherosclerotic CVD and evidence of target-organ damage, and detection of secondary causes of hypertension and presence of comorbidities (such as CVD and kidney disease). Lifestyle changes, including dietary modifications and increased physical activity, are effective in lowering BP and preventing hypertension and its CVD sequelae. Pharmacological therapy is very effective in lowering BP and in preventing CVD outcomes in most patients; first-line antihypertensive medications include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers and thiazide diuretics.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of morbidity, mortality, and health-care use worldwide. COPD is caused by exposure to inhaled noxious particles, notably tobacco smoke and pollutants. However, the broad range of factors that increase the risk of development and progression of COPD throughout the life course are increasingly being recognised. Innovations in omics and imaging techniques have provided greater insight into disease pathobiology, which might result in advances in COPD prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Although few novel treatments have been approved for COPD in the past 5 years, advances have been made in targeting existing therapies to specific subpopulations using new biomarker-based strategies. Additionally, COVID-19 has undeniably affected individuals with COPD, who are not only at higher risk for severe disease manifestations than healthy individuals but also negatively affected by interruptions in health-care delivery and social isolation. This Seminar reviews COPD with an emphasis on recent advances in epidemiology, pathophysiology, imaging, diagnosis, and treatment.

Cough is the most common illness-related reason for ambulatory care visits in the United States. Acute bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis characterized by cough due to acute inflammation of the trachea and large airways without evidence of pneumonia. Pneumonia should be suspected in patients with tachypnea, tachycardia, dyspnea, or lung findings suggestive of pneumonia, and radiography is warranted. Pertussis should be suspected in patients with cough persisting for more than two weeks that is accompanied by symptoms such as paroxysmal cough, whooping cough, and post-tussive emesis, or recent pertussis exposure. The cough associated with acute bronchitis typically lasts about two to three weeks, and this should be emphasized with patients. Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses, and antibiotics are not indicated in patients without chronic lung disease. Antibiotics have been shown to provide only minimal benefit, reducing the cough or illness by about half a day, and have adverse effects, including allergic reactions, nausea and vomiting, and Clostridium difficile infection. Evaluation and treatment of bronchitis include ruling out secondary causes for cough, such as pneumonia; educating patients about the natural course of the disease; and recommending symptomatic treatment and avoidance of unnecessary antibiotic use. Strategies to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use include delayed prescriptions, patient education, and calling the infection a chest cold.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a major preventable cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Venous thromboembolism (VTE), which includes DVT and pulmonary embolism (PE), affects an estimated 1 per 1,000 people and contributes to 60,000–100,000 deaths annually. Normal blood physiology hinges on a delicate balance between pro- and anti-coagulant factors. Virchow's Triad distills the multitude of risk factors for DVT into three basic elements favoring thrombus formation: venous stasis, vascular injury, and hypercoagulability. Clinical, biochemical, and radiological tests are used to increase the sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing DVT. Anticoagulation therapy is essential for the treatment of DVT. With few exceptions, the standard therapy for DVT has been vitamin K-antagonists (VKAs) such as warfarin with heparin or fractionated heparin bridging. More recently, a number of large-scale clinical trials have validated the use of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) in place of warfarin in select cases. In this review, we summarize the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and medical management of DVT, with particular emphasis on anticoagulation therapy and the role of DOACs in the current treatment algorithm.

Chest pain from respiratory causes is a common complaint and may indicate the presence of a serious or even life-threatening pathologic condition. Most chest pains are the result of irritation or inflammation of the parietal pleura, as the visceral pleura is insensate, although pain may arise from direct malignant invasion or trauma to the chest wall. Rapid recognition with appropriate understanding of the anatomy and physiology of chest pain from respiratory causes is vital to ensure timely and appropriate therapy.

Raised total cholesterol is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD). It remains unknown whether sex differences exist in the relationship between total cholesterol and CVD outcomes. PubMed was searched in December 2014 for cohort studies reporting on the relationship between total cholesterol and coronary heart disease (CHD) and total stroke, separately in men and women. Random effects meta-analyses with inverse variance weighting were used to obtain adjusted pooled sex-specific relative risks (RR) and women-to-men ratio of RRs (RRRs). Raised total cholesterol is a strong risk factor for CHD, with evidence of a small, but significantly stronger, effect in men compared to women. Raised total cholesterol had little effect on the risk of total stroke in both sexes.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia refers to a particular onset and course of cognitive and functional decline associated with age together with a particular neuropathology. It was first described by Alois Alzheimer in 1906 about a patient whom he first encountered in 1901. Modern clinical diagnostic criteria have been developed, and criteria have also been proposed to recognize preclinical (or presymptomatic) stages of the disease with the use of biomarkers. The primary neuropathology was described by Alzheimer, and in the mid-1980s subsequently evolved into a more specific neuropathologic definition that recognizes the comorbid neuropathologies that frequently contribute to clinical dementia. Alzheimer's disease is now the most common form of neurodegenerative dementia in the United States with a disproportionate disease burden in minority populations. Deficits in the ability to encode and store new memories characterizes the initial stages of the disease. Subsequent progressive changes in cognition and behavior accompany the later stages. Changes in amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleavage and production of the APP fragment beta-amyloid (Aβ) along with hyperphosphorylated tau protein aggregation coalesce to cause reduction in synaptic strength, synaptic loss, and neurodegeneration. Metabolic, vascular, and inflammatory changes, as well as comorbid pathologies are key components of the disease process. Symptomatic treatment offers a modest, clinically measurable effect in cognition, but disease-modifying therapies are desperately needed.